# REST Services

[REST](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer) (REpresenational State Transfer) services were defined in a dissertation written by Roy Fielding in 2000.

The main characteristics of a REST service are:

* Client/Server
* Stateless - the server should not maintain client state. State is sent with each request.
* Cacheable - resources decide for themselves if they are cacheable or not (and how long)
* Hypertext driven (in an ideal world)

## REST Resources ##

A central concept in REST is the Resource. Each resource has a separate URI. For instance, the following are all
different resources:

* /api/courses
* /api/courses/26892
* /api/courses/26892/students
* etc.

It is common to define a resource (such as /api/courses) which represents a list (in this case, a list of courses). The URL /api/courses/26892 represents a given instance of a course, and is a separate resource. Then, that particular course can have further subresources, such as a list of students (/api/courses/26892/students).

## REST and HTTP ##

Technically, REST doesn't depend on HTTP. However, most REST services are implemented using HTTP, and the reason for
that is that HTTP fits wery well, since all the main characteristics of REST are also prevalent in HTTP.

It is therefore almost universal for REST services to use concepts from HTTP:

* Using HTTP verbs (GET, POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE) to indicate what kind of operation is being performed. The alternative is to put the verb into the URL, but this should be avoided.
* Using HTTP status codes (200 OK, 301 Redirect, 404 Not Found etc.) to indicate if the request was successful or not.
* Using the "Accept" HTTP Header to indicate what format should be used for data (XML, JSON etc.).
* Using cache-commands defined in HTTP to control caching.
* Using the "Location" HTTP header when a new entity is created, i.e. the response from the server should include the new Location.

[This answer](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1619152/how-to-create-rest-urls-without-verbs/1619677#1619677) from Stackoverflow has some really good guidelines when it comes to designing a REST service.

## Using HTTP Verbs ##

In this model, when the client issues a GET request for a given resource, this would indicate that the client wants
to read information about that resource. Example: a GET request for /api/courses should return a list of courses,
while a POST request for that resource will create a new course. It might make sense to support the HTTP DELETE verb
as well, which would then delete all courses. Supporting other verbs would hardly make any sense **in that case**.

Other resources, such as /api/courses/26892 could support the following HTTP verbs: 

* GET (returns a single course)
* PUT (updates the course)
* DELETE (removes the course)
* PATCH (updates one or more properties in a course)

In this case, a POST request would not really make any sense (what should be created?). It is also worth noting that 
a DELETE request doesn't actually have to delete anything, i.e. it is perfectly acceptable to implement that method
such that the underlying resource is only marked as deleted, although the data is still there. It might even make
sense to implement other methods using the DELETE verb. Assume we've got a task application, and we need to implement
a "close task" operation. This could be done by using a DELETE verb, since by closing a task it should no longer
be accessible.

## Versioning ##

All APIs will need maintenance, and this will probably lead to changes in the API. Some of these changes may be
breaking, i.e. they will require different behaviour for clients. This is very likely, and should therefore be
anticipated from the start.

One way to solve this is to put a version number into the URL:

* /api/v1/courses
* /api/v1/courses/26892
* etc.

This way, if a given resource changes, it could get a new version number, while the old version of the resource
could be maintained (not indefinitely though, as a general rule of thumb we should phase out old versions, and only
maintain older versions for maybe 2-3 versions).

This is by no means the only way to implement this. Other possibilities include:

* adding a special HTTP Header to the request, which would indicate what version is being requested
* modifying the "Accept" HTTP header to include the version

None of those options is without faults, as is discussed in [this article](http://www.troyhunt.com/2014/02/your-api-versioning-is-wrong-which-is.html).

## REST Maturity Model ##

The REST Maturity Model was defined in 2008 by [Leonard Richardson](http://www.crummy.com/).

It has 4 levels:

* Level 0: A single URL, often only accessible using HTTP POST.
* Level 1: Resources - i.e. the application defines different URIs for each resource.
* Level 2: HTTP verbs - the application uses GET/POST/PUT/PATCH/DELETE instead of putting the verb in the URL (/api/v1/courses/create)
* Level 3: Hypermedia controls - the application only exposes a single URI, and the client doesn't really need to know anything about the available resources, other than the root resource.

Most REST services written today are at level 2 (or perhaps 2.5).

## HATEOAS ##

At level 3, a REST service will only define a single URL (a Root URL), which all subresources are accessible through.
See here: [http://www.bizcoder.com/hypermedia-as-the-engine-of-application-state-the-client-server-dance](http://www.bizcoder.com/hypermedia-as-the-engine-of-application-state-the-client-server-dance)

## Further reading

* [http://scotch.io/bar-talk/designing-a-restful-web-api](http://scotch.io/bar-talk/designing-a-restful-web-api)
